docs(ins): add srm (#6041)
scaleway/docs-content: pages/instances/reference-content/instances-shared-responsibility-model.mdx

---
title: Scaleway Instances Shared Responsibility Model
description: Learn about the shared responsibility model for Scaleway Instances services, outlining the roles of Scaleway and users in managing Instances security, backups, and compliance.
tags: instances srm
dates:
  validation: 2026-01-12
  posted: 2026-01-12
---

On this page, we outline the roles and responsibilities for maintaining and securing your Virtual and GPU Instances. Our shared responsibility model clarifies the division of duties between Scaleway and our users, ensuring clarity in managing Instances availability, backups, configurations, and security measures. By understanding this shared responsibility, you can optimize the performance, reliability, and security of your Scaleway CPU Instances and GPU Instances services.

<Message type="note">

>   Vous pouvez télécharger le modèle de responsabilité partagée relatif aux instances en français [ici](/pdf/SRM-Instances-FR.pdf/). Veuillez noter que, pour les valeurs contractuelles, la version anglaise fait foi.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Vous pouvez télécharger le modèle de responsabilité partagée relatif aux Instances en français [ici](/pdf/SRM-Instances-FR.pdf/). Veuillez noter que, pour les valeurs contractuelles, la version anglaise fait foi.
```

</Message>
## Overview of the "Cloud Security vs. Security in the Cloud" Model

At Scaleway, the security of your data and applications is crucial. To ensure a robust and secure environment, we operate under a shared responsibility model, which clearly distinguishes Scaleway's obligations from those of our users. This model is often conceptualized as "Security *of* the Cloud" and "Security *in* the Cloud".

### Security of the Cloud (Scaleway's Responsibility)

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Scaleway is responsible for the **security *of* the Cloud**. This means we are committed to protecting the overall infrastructure that runs all services offered in the Scaleway Cloud. Our responsibilities include:

* **Physical security of data centers:** Protection of facilities, access control, monitoring.
* **Network infrastructure security:** Protection of networks, platforms, and operating systems that underpin our services.
* **Virtualization security:** Resource isolation, hypervisors, and management of virtual environments.
* **Infrastructure maintenance and updates:** Applying security patches and updates for components managed by Scaleway.
* **Compliance and certifications:** Maintaining our own certifications (e.g., ISO 27001, HDS) and adhering to regulations applicable to our role as a cloud service provider.

In other words, Scaleway is responsible for protecting the environment in which your Instances reside.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

* **Identity and Access Management (IAM):** Configuration of permissions, roles, SSH keys, multi-factor authentication (MFA), and the principle of least privilege for accessing your resources.
* **Network security of your Instances:** Configuration of firewalls, security groups, and network access for your Instances.
* **Application security:** Protecting your applications against vulnerabilities, managing dependencies, and monitoring application logs.
* **Compliance of your workloads:** Ensuring that your applications and data comply with industry regulations and your own internal security policies.

This shared responsibility model is essential for a comprehensive and effective security approach. It allows you to leverage the robustness of the Scaleway infrastructure while retaining the flexibility and control necessary to secure your own workloads. A clear understanding of these roles ensures that all facets of security are considered.

## Product resiliency

### Availability

The detailed SLAs measurements and guarantees can be found at [Service Level Agreement for Scaleway Instances Services](https://www.scaleway.com/en/virtual-instances/sla/).

> Once the resource is in your hands, we have no access to the machine and therefore no way to monitor its operation. In case of any operational issues, we invite you to consult our documentation or create a ticket with our support team. We will then do our utmost to ensure that you regain access to your resources as quickly as possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the resource is in your hands, we have no access to the machine and therefore no way to monitor its operation. If you face operational issues, we recommend consulting our documentation or creating a support ticket for assistance in regaining access to your resources.
```

### Backups and snapshots

You are fully responsible for managing your virtual machine and its data.
It is your responsibility to ensure data redundancy if necessary, by relying on backups or Instance snapshots.

> It is your responsibility to define the necessary redundancy measures based on the nature and criticality level of your data. We remind you that a snapshot does not in any way constitute a permanent backup of your data, but only an "instantaneous" copy of the Instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is your responsibility to:
- Manage your virtual machine and its data.
- Ensure data redundancy, if necessary, by relying on backups or Instance snapshots.
- Define the necessary redundancy measures based on the nature and criticality level of your data. We remind you that a snapshot does not in any way constitute a permanent backup of your data, but only an "instantaneous" copy of the Instance.
```

- Updating custom scripts and automation mechanisms to be compatible with the latest API versions
- Ensuring that any third-party developer tool or integration (such as Terraform or Packer) is compatible with the latest API versions published by Scaleway.

### Usage compliance

You are responsible for the proper use of your resources. In this regard, you are responsible for maintaining the use of your Instances in accordance with Scaleway’s compliance policy and terms of services, as well as those of the various operating systems you use.
<Message type="important">
  It is your responsibility to inform yourself beforehand about the permitted and prohibited use cases for your Instances and to adhere to them throughout your usage.
</Message>

## Data protection

### Encryption in transit
Instances (CPU and GPU) support SSH connections to secure your communication with them. You remain responsible for configuring SSH keys.

### Data encryption

You are responsible for encrypting the volumes on your Instance. We are not responsible for data encryption, especially in cases of sensitive applications or additional security requirements.

> Refer to our documentation on [encrypting volumes for sensitive data](https://www.scaleway.com/en/docs/tutorials/encrypt-volumes/) for further information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Refer to our documentation on [encrypting volumes for sensitive data](/tutorials/encrypt-volumes/) for further information.
```

### Data deletion

> * **Local storage:** When you delete your Instance, we are responsible for removing all of your data on the Local Storage of the Instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Local storage:** When you delete your Instance, we are responsible for removing all of your data from the Local Storage of the Instance.
```

## Security best practices
For optimal security, we recommend that you:
* use an ED25519 SSH key to access your machine, rather than using username and password authentication,
* check and update the firewall and filtering rules if necessary (following the principle of least privilege: "Deny all by default, allow by exception"),
* configure security groups for your Instances to limit their exposure on the internet,
* regularly update the operating system to take advantage of configuration updates and security patches,
* regularly monitor our changelog and documentation for updates on API changes and update automation tools and CLI regularly to avoid unnoticed breaking changes 

## HDS (Hébergement de Données de Santé) - Complete Documentation

This section consolidates all HDS-specific information and requirements for healthcare data hosting compliance.

### HDS Data Residency

* **HDS Instances:** Restricted to France. Data must not be transferred outside the authorized perimeter.

> * **Scaleway Responsibility:** Technically guarantee that data remains within the authorized Parisian datacenters, and will not modify customer’s selected localisation during resource allocation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Scaleway Responsibility:** Technically guarantee that data remains within the authorized Parisian datacenters, and will not modify the customer’s selected localisation during resource allocation.
```

* **Customer Responsibility:** Do not configure transfer to other regions. Do not use or create instances in non-HDS regions for your HDS infrastructure, or non-HDS instances.

> ### HDS Compliance Requirements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### HDS compliance requirements
```

As a user of HDS Instances, you are responsible for:
* Signing Scaleway's HDS contract,
* Ensuring access is restricted to authorized personnel,
* Respecting authorized Instance offers, including storage requirements.
* Use Audit Trail for log provisioning purposes

Scaleway Responsibility: Provide HDS-certified infrastructure and ensure best efforts  to maintain certification. The loss of certificate may result in the termination of our commercial relationship with the HDS customer. These elements are included in the HDS contract.

### HDS Encryption

As a user of HDS Instances, you are responsible for:

* Implementing appropriate technical and organisational measures depending on your related security policies
* Encrypting your data at rest and in transit on public and private networks

> * Ensuring that the services you use are compatible with encryption solutions you plan on using.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Ensuring that the services you use are compatible with the encryption solutions you plan on using.
```

## HDS Instance Offers

### Authorized Instance offers

> | Configuration Type                                          | Eligible for HDS purposes ? | Authorized type of storage                                                                      |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Configuration type                                          | Eligible for HDS purposes | Authorized type of storage                                                                      |
```

Reviewer: Don't know if it will be necessary to add extra spaces to compensate for the character change here.

|-------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Other instances SLO (DEV1, GP1, PLAY2, PRO2, COPARM1, ENT1) | No                          | N/A                                                                                             |

> | Development Instances                                       | Yes                         | Block storage Local storage (client’s responsibility to encrypt)                                |

Reviewer: We're capitalizing `Local Storage` and `Block Storage`, or keeping them lowercase?

| Shared General Purpose Instances                            | Yes                         | Block storage (i.e no local storage allowed) Local storage (client’s responsibility to encrypt) |
| Dedicated General Purpose Instances                         | Yes                         | Block storage (i.e no local storage allowed) Local storage (client’s responsibility to encrypt) |
| Specialized Instances                                       | Yes                         | Block storage (i.e no local storage allowed) Local storage (client’s responsibility to encrypt) |
| GPU Instances                                               | Yes                         | Block storage  Scratch storage Local storage (client’s responsibility to encrypt)               |

Responsibilities:
 * **Customer:** Ensure only eligible offers are used and understand the obligations regarding storage options.

> ## HDS Data Deletion

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## HDS data deletion
```
